---
title: Intuitive Requirements Gathering
category: Business Requirements
feature_image: "https://unsplash.it/1200/400?image=200"
---

By definition, the requirements gathering phase in a traditional or an Agile SDLC is a significant and important one. Domain experts, dedicated business analysts, spend hours gathering and documenting requirements. A person who has done requirement gathering previously in a similar business domain is the one sought after for specific projects that have requirement gathering involved. Our topic of discussion is, however, different. It deals with how the rest of us can do it, without much of a domain expertise in gathering and understanding requirements of multiple business verticals.

<!-- more -->

Solely by my background, I have spent the last two decades in designing and building systems and certainly not spent the entire time gathering requirements. However, it is the same background or the informal nature of it that prepared a person like me, to be able to gather, understand and explain requirements irrespective of the business domain. How? Well, when we had just started, the software industry was less organized. A lot of small to medium companies took up vast and ambitious projects. I can remember my first massive project was to build an Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) application for a 150-year-old Horse Racing Club. We had a tiny team and indeed wore multiple hats. Our leader took us to the grand head office of the Club and told us that by the time we leave this organization, it must run using our software. That was a single line primary requirement that we gathered on our first day there, from our leader. Everything else, for which we have dedicated teams today was a drill down in our minds. Multiple times a week, we spent part of the day listening and asking a question to various levels of managers who understood horse racing. All of us. Then the same all of us, designed databases, wrote code, designed user interfaces for Finance, Payroll, Sales, Horse Racing, Inventory, Purchasing and other modules of the software. What we found was that pure listening to requirements sessions could take a long time we did not have. Instead, each one of us practiced in our mind, running a large Horse Racing Club as our business. This exercise is quite similar in nature that movie actors engage in acting workshops for specific roles they play in the movies. The only difference is that actors are given readymade scripts and are directed. In our case, there were no scripts; we made our own scripts. 

There is a fundamental human instinct that tries to prevent one from failing. From the moment we assumed of having our own Horse racing business, we started understanding the reason of requirements there profoundly without spending as much time. The users in that Club were surprised by us telling them so much knowledge that they could not understand how we got. In short, this is called intuitive requirements gathering. This essentially says that do not collect requirements. First, feel requirements within our minds and then validate them with the domain experts. This promotes an enhanced level engagement in the project and is very useful in impressing the user base as they see genuine interest being shown by the IT team in their affairs.


Let us see an example. Let us assume that our team has received a massive, multi-year home mortgage modernization project from a national bank based in the US. None of the team members have any past mortgage domain experience. One way is to look for dedicated business analysts having that experience. However, what we will see here is different. For a moment, let us imagine winning a huge lottery and starting a small home mortgage lending company with the proceeds from the lottery. It is our firm opened with our very own hard-earned (from the lottery) money. Who are the people we can imagine our business will interact with

1. People seeking home mortgage finance, i.e., Applicants
2. Others we do not yet know.

As stated, it is our own company, and any naive decision would make us lose money. We need to apply common sense to protect our own money from fraud and legal issues. People show genuine talent when it comes to protecting their personal wealth. We are not an exception. The moment we started owning a mortgage company, multiple common senses began appearing within our mind. Now, before we lend money to the applicant, we would like to make sure several things such as 

1. Is the property properly and legally owned by the seller and if yes can this fact be validated by an independent third party? Address Validation third party?
2. Does the applicant earn enough money to qualify for the mortgage? Income / employment / investment verification?
3. Even if she does, what are his/her expenses and how much money is left after paying for bills? Marital status / Alimony / other bills to pay?
4. What are the details of the house to justify the asked price? No of bedrooms / bathrooms / garages / appliances etc.
5. Does the application behaved well with his past lenders and if he is there an independent agency to validate that fact? i.e., Our past lenders have reviewed our  CR. Shall we not do the same for our applicants?

Hundreds of common sense questions like these may come to our mind, the moment we start acting like an owner of the client's business. There are apparently two ways of learning new things. The first is to study the external world or learn from someone else. The second, is, however, examining our own world experiences and our collective senses. We would be amazed how much knowledge is already stored, hidden from our view probably if we start digging and acting like an owner with a clear imagination and inquisitive nature.


Intuitive Requirements Gathering is something that we learned back in the mid-nineties. Since then we have practiced the same requirements gathering/feeling/owning exercise even though we were not a dedicated business analyst. we felt understanding and feeling the requirements of our users is the very first commitment expected out of every sound software professional. Surprisingly, this approach has helped us navigate some significant business verticals later during our journey within India and the USA. In my case alone, the list includes Process and Discrete Manufacturing, Telecom, Home Mortgage, Pharmacy Benefit, Health Insurance, Consumer Electronics, Construction Insurance and Retail, to name a few. 

In the process, we have played the business roles of various human beings in our minds. We became and felt like the store/accounting Clarks and designed user interfaces that they loved. We felt like mid/top level managers and developed reports that provided the critical information they missed earlier. We felt like the CEO/CIO and designed intuitive ways to scale the system easily during peak loads. We thought like the operations manager and created fast ways to identify, isolate and troubleshoot issues to minimize system downtime for highly critical systems. We felt like low paid coal miners and when we delivered their electronic payslips free of errors saw the broad smiles on their faces. We felt like store managers and designed efficient inventory systems to optimize reorder levels and reduced working capitals blocked in unused inventory. In essence, our software systems served everybody from the junior most employees to the highest office within the Organization. All, by intuitive requirements, gathering. All by intuitively playing/acting in the multiple roles of our user bases. Even the most demanding users, fearing being impacted from the new systems, revealed the most critical aspects of the existing system, when they discovered our shared understanding of their side.

Feeling requirements leave us with significant time for getting the task done correctly in the first attempt. It also makes us free to learn new technologies on the horizon. Doing quality work driven by intuitive requirements gathered can save valuable time. This time can be invested elsewhere to create a value-based individualistic edge as a professional. Doing requirements ourselves as Software Architects will lead to less confusion, can reduce time and energy spent on multiple false attempts. The time saved can be spent on something else we love such as learning new technologies, obtain valuable vendor certifications such as the AWS Solution Architect one. If this is practiced over a long time, this style can create unmatched career value. For example, it leaves people time to stay current with the changes in technology such as Cloud and Big Data. At the same time, with our new found knowledge we can walk into any old clients that we served to modernize their infrastructure, again through intuitive requirements gathering!
